social media arguments and people really
trashing each other. And I just think
that's ungentlemanly and a waste of
time. And people get wrapped up in who
is right, which is really dumb because
what you should be concerned about is
what is right. [music]
[music]
Hi, my name is John Jish. I'm a doctor
of biomedical engineering which gives me
a unique perspective beyond what you see
on YouTube from most of the sports
sports scientists that comment on all
things fitness related. Today I want to
do something a little different than I
normally do. I want to react to a video
that somebody sent me where and I I
don't love this this kind of thing
because I I I don't like talking about
bodybuilding all that much for a lot of
different reasons, but mostly it's
because there's a lot of um social media
arguments and people really trashing
each other and I just think that's
ungentlemanly and a waste of time And
people get wrapped up in who is right,
which is really dumb because what you
should be concerned about is what is
right. Like if you decide you you're
going to follow a person, well the
person can be wrong, but there are ideas
that are infallible.
So, it's a shame if somebody's just so
blinded by the overwhelming amount of
information that's available on social
media that they end up being frustrated
and following somebody who's really
giving bad advice, which is why we're
going to not really jump into the fray,
but we're going to take a look at this
video. And this is Dorian Yates
commenting on Dr. Mike Israel and uh how
and the reason we're doing this is
because this is more about the volume
versus high intensity
scientific issue. Uh what ended up
happening was Mike Israel he he picked a
side and he decided that he likes high
volume and everything he talks about is
high volume and he ridicules the people
who take the high intensity approach.
Well, the problem when you do that is
you're ridiculing basically some of the
biggest and best ever uh including
Dorian Yates. Mike Menser, Ronnie
Coleman was a very high intensity guy.
He did a little bit more volume than
uh than Dorian Yates. But still, you
have to keep in mind that the people who
approached it from a strength
perspective, which is the same that I
approach building strength and muscle
from, always do the best. So Mike Israel
was trashing Mike Menser, uh, who
actually died about a I think about a
decade ago. Nothing bodybuilding
related, congenital heart issue. But
Mike Mener was famous for saying you
really don't need much more than one set
per exercise per workout. even though
all of his programs included two sets,
but they were different exercises, which
makes really not much of a difference.
So, I think sometimes people summarize
what Mike Mener was talking about into,
oh, the one set guy. Well, he was never
really a one set guy. And if you look at
how Dorian Yates and Mike Mener trained
together, Dorian did a tiny bit more
volume, like maybe three sets per body
part, but then he hit each body part uh
one time per week. So, and then closer
to his shows, he'd hit every body part
two times per week. And there's probably
some reasons relating to that that have
more to do with performance-enhancing
drugs than have to do with actual uh
sports performance science that we can
get any value out of. But let's watch
this video.
>> Who am I compared to Mike Menser? I'm
bigger and stronger than Mike Mener.
That's it. I'm more educated than Mike
Menser. I know more things than Mike
Mer.
>> First of all, I hope that you're being
like tongue and cheek kind of humorous.
Otherwise, I fear either for your
eyesight or your mental health because
obviously your physique's nowhere near
Mike Mensah uh even with all the peeds
that you're [music] taking off your
life. Well, maybe you need to ask
yourself whether it's worth it, mate.
Cuz a [music] bag of that gets
bigger is just a bigger bag of
>> Yeah, that was a little more aggressive
than I thought it was going to be. But,
uh clearly Dorian doesn't think much of
Mike. I suppose it's justified because
Mike's insulting Mike Mener who is
Dorian's really good friend or was
before he died. Yeah. So I there's a
little bit of personal issue in there,
but the real crisis between these guys
is the argument of high volume
versus high intensity low volume. Yeah.
I I like I like I started the video with
these volume guys, they're wrong. And uh
I I said in a previous video, these
volume recommendations are so ludicrous
you'd have to quit your job to to meet
up with them. Like 52 sets per week for
quads.
Like most people don't do 52 sets for
their entire body per week or or would
be able to find the time to or have the
energy. Of course, they train with very
low intensity. So that just means you
have to spend hours and hours at the gym
doing weightlifting that you're not
really trying very hard for. The best in
the world have never trained like that.
Uh in fact, I think you'll find zero
people who are best in the world. Every
once in a while somebody will say like
like Jay Cutler
trained with higher volume and he didn't
go he he claims he didn't go to failure,
but when you watch him train, man, I
really think he did. Uh so I I think
maybe
Sometimes he went to failure, other
times he didn't. But all the other
examples,
it's the guy who trains the hardest ends
up being the best. And that shouldn't
surprise you. And anybody who's telling
you you need to train less hard and just
do more like movement stuff just over
and over and over again. Yeah, they're
they might be referencing science, but I
think there's something wrong with the
science that's coming out about higher
volume. Uh, and hey, there's there's
plenty of people. Lyall McDonald, who
has uh become of interest lately. He's a
very famous trainer and has a has a a
good YouTube channel where he talks
about sports science from a very
detailed perspective. He he even
questions if some of these studies even
took place because if you look at the
volume that they were doing, we're
talking hours and hours and hours. How
did you find a test subject
to even do this or did they actually do
it? Are you just making this up? So, uh,
and I I said in a video from about a
month ago that I believe the studies
actually happened, but
since that came out, a bunch of people
sent me a bunch of studies and I see
this theme recurring where it's sort of
like an almost impossible level of
volume is being talked about. Then on
top of that,
Mike Israel, uh, he lied about a couple
things involving his dissertation
that some people complained about. And I
don't think it's very fair to beat up on
a person for their dissertation. Uh,
mostly because
it's when you get started as a
scientist.
So like, are you the best you're ever
going to be on day one? Well, if you
are, then you really suck because you're
supposed to be getting better as you
progress in anything you do. So, I mean,
okay, his dissertation was he still
maintains that it's a really important
piece of science. And I mean, hey, dude,
that's not true. It's not. It I mean,
the conclusion
statement was that people with bigger
muscles are stronger. Like, I wish I
were kidding, but no, that's really what
it was about. and it was just sort of
like a 100page
wandering narrative.
Um, yeah, I don't know. Not the best.
But I mean, hey, is it is it PhD quality
work? Well, his advisers said it was.
So, if anybody's really the bad guy, it
might be whoever approved that document
because I mean, hey, students turn in
lousy work sometimes. It's up to the
professor to say, you know, you got to
do another draft of this. So, I I I like
Mike Ezra Ezartel. I really like Dorian
Yates. Uh, and and I I mean, when it
comes to this debate or pretty much any
debate, it's tough. Dorian's a really
honest guy. And he's he was open and
honest about all his training, all his
peed use, his entire career. He's been
on in a number of documentaries talking
about bodybuilding, talking about the
ups upsides and downsides and how he
handles his training afterward. And it's
a it's somebody worth worth really
looking into and admiring because I I I
think he's a I think he's great. But um
just just keep this in mind as just yet
another piece of evidence of
where the the higher volume the people
making the higher volume arguments are
just
you know this this whole thing was about
a personal comparison where Mike Israel
says I'm better than this other guy who
invented this highintensity program and
really it wasn't Mike Menser it was
actually Arthur Jones the founder of
Nautilus and Mike Mener and Arthur Jones
worked together. So I I don't think
Menser ever claimed to be the guy when
it comes to highintensity training. And
also the idea that people trained with
intensity before
uh the 1970s when he became popular is
pretty obvious. Yeah. I you you never
want to be the guy that's like I'm right
because you know look at look at me like
and you know show your biceps. Okay,
great. you can have great genetics and
train like an idiot. Yeah, it doesn't
mean anything. So, it's unfortunate and
I think I think Mike Isertel really
needs to rethink his approach to this.
And um also uh his good buddy Jeff
Nepard is kind of switched sides in that
for years he was preaching ludicrous
levels of volume being in the gym all
the time. But he did a video a couple
months ago where he cut his training
volume in half and continued to
progress. Or or I guess maybe he said,
"I didn't lose any muscle." And I was
like so surprised. And it's like, yeah,
eye roll. Okay. It actually doesn't take
very much to maintain muscle once you
build it. Uh and he knows that. So, I I
don't really know where he was going
with that video, but at least he's
willing to acknowledge that there is
merit behind these these highintensity
programs. And I I think whereas Nepard's
saying there's merit behind both, Yates
is saying there's merit behind both and
he prefers high intensity. I'm saying
there's merit behind both and I prefer
high intensity. But Mike Israel is
saying volume is king and if you don't
believe that, you're you're just you're
wrong. And uh that's really bad science
because it's ignoring a lot of a lot of
things. It's not telling both sides of
the story. It's kind of dishonest.
[music]
So, hope this helps. Ask me anything in
the comments. See you on the next one.
If this video helped you, I want you to
subscribe and follow. I'm going to put
out videos on a regular basis. I think
they're going to help a whole lot of
people. Especially if you're one of
those people that doesn't just instantly
grow from lifting regular weights. We've
got the answer for you.